okay thank you everyone for being here and thanks everyone for helping
to organize this event my name is jonathan warden i
'm an independent researcher i am an engineer co-founder of
a small research organization called social protocols.
org my focus is on the the problem of how the design
of platforms social platforms and algorithms has positive or negative social outcomes
and my big thesis is that if platforms can inadvertently create
all these negative social outcomes couldn't they be intentionally designed to
produce positive social outcomes so instead of misinformation and toxicity and division
couldn't they promote intelligent conversation and finding common ground i've
been approaching this problem from the point of view of game theory
information theory argumentation theory collective intelligence a whole lot of theory
and the reason i'm working on community notes now is it
's one of the only examples i know of where the theory
has been put into practice successfully and at scale community notes on
twitter has actually helped to decrease the the spread of misinformation on
twitter so i'm going to talk to you briefly about why
i think community notes is great both for fighting misinformation and as
a unique and powerful scalable tool for peer moderation i'll give
you a brief demonstration of blue notes and then i'll talk
mainly about the architecture some of the architectural challenges with bringing community
notes to at protocol and making it decentralized and composable some
of the challenges include making annotations work via labeler infrastructure
privacy and anonymity and of course bots and manipulation so 300
years ago jonathan swift said falsehood flies and truth comes
limping after it so that when men come to be unde
ceived it is too late and he hadn't even heard
of twitter he um rumors have always in misinformation or falsehood
has always spread and it spreads largely because people think that it
's true some people are spreading misinformation maliciously but it spreads
faster because people don't know the truth so what what community
notes does is it helps increase the velocity of truth in social
networks it helps the truth sometimes catch up to people and so
people you know where normally they just share something because they believe
that it's true it looks plausible they kind of want to
believe it's true somebody just tells them hey this is actually
not true this is just a rumor this image is fake well
then maybe they wouldn't share it now besides being a great
tool for for combating misinformation community notes also is a very
unique and powerful peer moderation protocol it is decentralized in the sense
that there are no privileged roles there are no administrators there are
no editors there's just the community and so it is moderation
without moderators and and that means that instead of trusting fact
checkers or editors instead of trusting people or in or organizations
you place your trust in the community and in the protocol that
that community uses to make decisions and there are some benefits in
placing trust in the community one is that people trust the results
of moderation decisions more that way people have a lot of trust
in community notes a plot across the political spectrum and one of
the reasons for that is that it's perceived as being fairly
neutral community notes was developed before Elon Musk took over and it
's still the algorithm is open source all the data is open
and it's still running using that same the same algorithm and
for the most part people still trust community notes even though they
don't trust necessarily the person that's running it and people
perceive it as neutral because in a sense it really is neutral
it is not just a naive majority voting based crowd-s
ourced fact-checking system it uses a very innovative
bridging algorithm what this algorithm tries to do it's not
just trying to find what's people think or what's most
popular it tries to find common ground and so one way of
looking at that is you can think of the algorithm as looking
at people's votes and saying okay well these votes this person
's upvoted this because they have a left-wing
bias and this person all these upvotes because this person
has a right-wing bias and maybe this person just up
votes everything or just downvotes everything so they just
have this this upvote bias but these votes there are
some votes can that cannot be explained away by bias and so
this this model uses discovers these latent factors that influence people's
votes and it says look this latent factor represents an area of
common ground and when a post or a community note has this
factor people are more likely to upvote that post or
that community note across the political spectrum across the spectrum of opinion
so in a sense it extracts signal from noise if you
have for example a group where the majority of people voting on
community notes is right-wing which is actually what happened with
what exists in x right now if a community note gets a
lot of helpful ratings what does that mean does it mean that
it's helpful or does it mean that it supports a right
-wing worldview well it could be either we don't know
just by the fact that it's popular we don't know
why people upvoted it but the community notes algorithm breaks
that down into components and it says maybe most of these up
votes are just because it supports a right-wing worldview
but there's also a bunch of upvotes that can
't be explained away so easily so in some what it does
is it it's a protocol that scales peer moderation in a
way that it is robust to factual capture and i've written
more about that on a blog post jonathanwarden.
com understanding community notes if you're interested in that so my
goal is to bring at proto to bring community notes to at
proto and to make it decentralized i say pretty decentralized because i
don't i don't know what the word decentralized means anymore
after talking to all of you i am but what i mean
is that i want a system where the power of one any
one individual is limited so that no one can accumulate the power
to censor the results a system that is transparent so all
the data is open anyone can inspect look at the data and
run the algorithm and verify that it's doing what it says
it's supposed to be doing and then the at proto eth
os of algorithmic freedom and composability the system i'm
proposing allows you to mix and match your moderation apps your algorithms
your labelers and so on i've designed this to be
a decision a generalized peer moderation protocol not just for community notes
but for labels or any sort of moderation decision and i've
designed this so they can work with other social networks you can
place labels or community notes on a mastodon post for
example so the the blue sky team and a lot of people
i've talked to here that are have their own social apps
have indicated that they want to integrate some sort of community notes
like feature but nobody knows exactly how they want that to work
how exactly do annotations work in at proto how do you
make this decentralized a lot of open questions but i've gone
ahead and just proposed some answers to those questions i have an
informal uh proposal called open community notes that i've um published
at that url or this url and then i've
gone ahead and i've created an implementation that i um called
blue notes blue notes is a based on a fork of the
blue sky social app i did this as a fork just to
demonstrate how community notes could be integrated into a social app i
don't necessarily want people to use this except for as beta
testers because community notes is not useful unless there's some
critical mass of users there needs to be enough people submitting and
rating notes for the algorithm to actually produce any output at all
and um so and then of course people are not going to
bother doing that unless the notes are actually going to be shown
on post because that's the only way they do any good
in fighting misinformation and so my goal my plan is to work
with blue sky and other skies other social apps to um to
refine this spec into something that that they think is acceptable that
they could integrate um into their social app um and um and
then have a launch um where there's a little bit of
um publicity so that we can build this initial con uh community
of contributors and actually start producing some useful community notes however in
the meantime anyone can integrate with this um and it's fairly
easy to integrate if you want your app to just show community
notes when they start to show up so i'm going to
do a quick demo if i can make it work okay okay
so all right so the fork of the blue sky app here
we have a section uh community note section where you can browse
existing community notes so here i'll look at some community notes
that have been rated helpful these have been rated helpful because i
manually went in and rated them helpful again the algorithm doesn't
produce any useful results yet so if a post has a helpful
community note you'll see that community note displayed underneath it this
looks just like it looks on x um you can then rate
the note i've already rated this one but i'm going
to delete my rating and resubmit i'll say yes
this is helpful i'll say why it's helpful um right
now these checkboxes this data is not actually used by
the algorithm where it is used a little bit but it's
not very important but i think it could be important in the
future so i've rated a note um finally i can write
a note actually i'm going to pull up a post that
's fairly recent i'm going to add a note to this
post here's a video of cash patel dancing i'm
sure you all wanted to see that but it's not actually
him it's uh was posted it's misinformation so i've
actually copied this community note from the community note that was posted
on x on the same post you often see the same misinformation
um being repeated in both platforms um factual error this is not
actually cash patel community notes require at least one source you
need to put in a url it's actually just plain
text but the ui checks that you've actually got a
url you need to say yes i think this is a
source that people would find trustworthy and now i submit and now
here's a here's a note you'll see that this
is a proposal so it's just a proposed note and i
'll talk a little bit more about the lexicon in
a moment so that's it for the ui it's
um really quite a simple ui and what's i think
a little bit more interesting about community notes is the protocol is
that the process for deciding how these notes or which notes are
found helpful which notes on which posts so first i'll talk
about annotations um actually i'm gonna go back and show
you one thing that i think is will be help you kind
of see under the hood what's going on here if you
look at the same post on the blue sky app what you
'll see is it has a tag i've subscribed to the
blue notes labeler uh the yeah it's got a label
um i've subscribed to the blue notes labeler and when
someone first submits the community notes to blue notes this label
is emitted now blue sky doesn't know how to show community
notes it knows there's a label it doesn't know how
to show a community note so what happens the blue note social
app the only difference is that it recognizes this tag it recognizes
the did of the community notes labeler and it says oh
okay this is a community note let me go fetch the content
of that community note and it makes an additional call you can
actually see that in the network tab for the nerds here
to get proposals well yeah proposals um
well let's see that didn't work so oh that's
right because it's not rated helpful so um but that's
what you could see um if there's an action there's
um if a note has been submitted but has not been rated
helpful you'll just see this prompt um to to go to
go rate the note um okay so uh that's how things
work now so it's a bit of a hack um to
put annotations on posts using the labeler infrastructure the way
it should work and i think this is kind of obvious is
that you should be able to add generalized labels so labels at
proto labels are actually a type of annotation annotation is just information
that one person adds to somebody else's post and at proto
labels actually map really well to the w3c annotations
data model an annotation in that data model is a target identified
with a uri and then a body and that body can
just be a semantic tag which is what natural proto label is
or it can be text or it can be some other things
and so it makes sense to generalize labels and to allow
them to the label infrastructure to support other types of annotations
an obvious way to do that is to add a field a
ref field is what i'm proposing here that points to the
uri of an app proto record with the content of the
annotation and then what seems to make sense is that app views
when they are hydrating posts right now as many of you
know the the app view will return a hydrated post that has
all the labels for that post or at least labels for the
labelers that you've subscribed to what would make sense if
the hydrated post also included the actual content of the annotation this
would look like a lot like an embedded record where if you
if you quote tweet a post you also get the the content
of the the quoted post in the hydrated record and then of
course that means that the social apps need to know how to
display these annotations and if there's there might be there
might not be a lot of different types of annotations some
that i can think of are highlights alt text and then this
context annotation is another type and so there's some interesting discussions
to be had about how do social apps know how to display
your annotation especially if you're using custom lexicons there
's some interesting discussions in the app proto discourse about lex
icon embed embedding records from arbitrary custom lexicons in
your posts so but i won't say more about that now
so the overall architecture i've actually based open community notes on
an existing project this year last year at this conference drew mac
arthur who was a student at uc boulder did
a talk about pimsky pimsky.
social pm is peer moderation and he created this the system in
this lexicon for peer moderation that was exactly what i
was envisioning for open community notes so i've actually adopted
his lexicon he had he extended it a little bit
for me so there this lexicon has just two record
types there's a proposal and that's for a proposed moderation
action it looks a lot like a label record um and so
but it can be it doesn't have to be necessarily a
label it could be a proposed annotation or some other proposed action
such as i don't know deleting a user or something like
that um and then there's a vote people can vote on
these proposals they can agree or disagree out vote or down vote
and that's it for the lexicon so the overall
architecture looks like this you have social apps that are able to
display annotations they receive annotations as labelers so individuals
can subscribe to annotators so you can subscribe to the blue
notes community notes annotator or some other or it can be
an app labeler or a built-in app annotator
default app annotator and then currently for community notes you need
to make this additional call to the notes api to fetch
the content of the annotation so integrating with your apps this with
your apps is really quite easy and then i'd like to
talk to people that are interested in integrating with their apps on
how i could make it easier like for example creating i don
't know a react component for for these notes or something like
that all right so the other piece moderation apps their job is
to just do those things that i showed you in the demo
you can browse notes you can submit community notes and you can
rate notes and of course moderation ops can also be used to
to submit and rate proposed labels or other moderation actions there's
a submission service which is an important piece of the architecture all
the proposal and vote records are submitted through the submission service and
it has the responsibility of anonymizing these records and this is
an important part of the architecture that i'll talk about in
just a moment and and then there are scoring services and you
can there there's the community note scoring service but of course
people can create their own algorithms for aggregating these votes and
making decisions and when the scoring service when a when a proposal
reaches a certain threshold when the score reaches a certain threshold that
proposal becomes a label or an annotation now privacy and anonymity
or pseudonymity is a very important component of community
notes anonymity is a dangerous thing in social networks if people
can create a bunch of fake accounts and post a lot of
anonymous crap you can really destroy a social social and online community
but in some instances anonymity can be a good thing and
when it comes anonymous voting for example is a good thing if
everybody knows how you're going to vote that may influence how
you vote and may make it harder for you to vote your
conscience and that's actually very important to the community notes algorithm
it kind of depends on people saying like uh this time i
this time i kind of agree with those people right like you
know i i don't like it but this looks like it
really does look like it's misinformation so i'm going to
honestly say yeah i think this is a helpful community note um
and so um so anonymity is important but the algorithm needs
some concept of identity it needs to know you know these posts
were made by this user um and so the solution is um
these anonymousids or my proposed solution these anonymousids so all
these records are created by the submission service the vote and proposal
records they're created using that submission services id um and then
the records contain an additional field an a id field or an
anonymous id field that corresponds to the user now this field is
generated as a hash of the user's actual did which the
submission service knows and a secret salt and that secret salt is
critical because it makes it so that you cannot easily map figure
out somebody's actual user did based on their anonymous id so
another challenge is of course bots the community notes algorithm is naturally
robust to bots it is not as easy as you might think
to manipulate the algorithm just by creating a bunch of fake accounts
and you know voting voting in one way the algorithm kind of
filters that out but with enough bots you can manipulate the algorithm
and so for community notes to work what you need is a
contributor contributor base that is mostly real people mostly acting in good
faith if you have too many bots or if you have too
many people that really are not trying to rate things as helpful
it won't work but you can have a lot of bias
right you don't have to have a group of perfect people
you just need to have mostly real people mostly acting in good
faith and so some possible solutions are proof of personhood minimum
account age requirements for example just general bot filtering tools there's
a lot of solutions that people have been talking about in this
in this conference that we could apply something called a rating impact
score which is what twitter does which requires you to have a
certain reputation based on your ratings before you can actually write notes
okay so finally one of the reasons i'm excited about community
notes is it is so there's so much unrealized potential
twitter under utilizes that so much because it is i was
inspired by edith's opening remarks yesterday one of the things
that she said is that social platforms should treat people as subjects
with agency and not as objects to be manipulated and i think
one thing that people with agency want is to use these platforms
to help discover truth they want to share truth right now so
many social algorithms will show you what you want to see show
you what they think you will believe but that's not what
i want a social platform i don't want a social platform
to show me what it thinks i will believe especially if the
platform knows or if there's a way to know that i
wouldn't believe this if i knew the truth if i had
more information and so i think there are so many ways if
you think about how can we design that you can use community
notes as a base for a social platform that has a lot
of affordances for helping people share and find accurate information i
the there's a product called roundabout that a new public
has created and they have for example a feature where when you
submit a post before you submit it it says hey um do
you really want to submit this this this violates some of
our community norms and it's just a prompt well the same
thing could happen for community notes you could write something and the
system could say hey look someone else has posted a similar claim
and and and there is a community note saying that this might
not be true are you sure you want to post this um
i think the algorithm could be faster it could cause it could
um notes could achieve a helpful or unhelpful um status
much much faster which could help increase the velocity of truth and
help misinformation not spread as fast um it can be more integrated
with the ranking algorithms if the algorithm knows that this post is
likely misinformation or that this post tends to this poster tends to
spread a lot of misinformation could downright that content a lot
of possibility with correction and retraction if you've shared misinformation
the system might prompt you hey look you shared this but now
there's this community note to help undo some of the damage
that happens when misinformation has already spread and then a lot of
other possibilities when for example a community note may itself be inaccurate
and what is the process for like putting a note on a
note which i think is opens up some really interesting possibilities for
like almost a deliberative argumentation type process for making these
decisions okay i took more time than i thought and we've
only got four minutes and 30 seconds left for questions um so
any questions anyone thank
you very much for really super detailed uh and very thoughtful i
i just want to recognize the the amount of thought that you
put into this all right any questions from the crowd here oh
we got thank you uh yeah super interesting i'm curious if
with the anonymity you could also integrate like reputation because it
seems like that also becomes important over time yes so the algorithm
itself has a reputation score kind of built into it um every
the way it works is every user is assigned um two two
uh parameters and these are two factors that kind of represents that
person's bias um and then this um this rating impact score
is also a sort of reputation system and there's some other
things but i in summary yes i think um reputation could really
improve the quality of their system right especially if you know like
this person when they rate a note as helpful it always ends
up being rated as helpful by the community and so you could
you could say look provisionally we're just going to go
ahead and display this community note as a helpful community note just
based on you know one or two people's ratings that have
a you know a high amount of trust thanks really cool presentation
and uh great work uh it strikes me that some of the
uh stuff that is worth building here uh that you've alluded
to like the anonymization service or you know reputation tracking algorithms
or maybe like ai for deduplicating proposals this kind
of thing is a centralizing vector um which is susceptible to
potential like corruption right you could have uh censorship of proposals during
the anonymization phase or this kind of thing so do you
have any thoughts on how to build resistance to that kind of
potential corruption yes i actually had a slide about that issue and
i skipped because i thought nobody would notice but um and so
the the weakest you you've zoomed in right on the
weakest piece of the system the system the piece that requires the
most trust it's the submission service so the submission service you
have to trust first of all not to de-anonym
ize you um and you have to trust that it's going
to submit what you say that it's going to submit now
some of that is verifiable you can go and submit something
and then if you don't see it show up in the
data you can say hey look these people are not doing what
they say they're going to be doing but that is the
weakest point of the system um and it does require trust so
for example if anyone were to um implement this in like in
your own social app um i would say run your own anonym
izer service um and that allows you also to control who can
contribute and help you can help control for for bots and just
you know general good faith contribution in that way in the long
run i think that weakness could be could be possibly addressed by
with cryptographic solutions with zero knowledge proofs um but i
don't think it's not necessarily it's not for now
i think it's important to recognize um that weakness even though
i was kind of trying to gloss over it but it's
important to recognize that and deal with it maybe in the future
and deal with it maybe in the future excellent all right well
thank you once again jonathan for an excellent presentation